## Introduction

Tf you want a new idea, read an old book. —attributed to Ivan Pavlov (among others)

When I was eighteen years old, in my first year of college, at Cass Business School I resisted. “Why would I want to go hear some monk?” I often went to see CEOs, celebrities, and other successful people lecture on My friend persisted, and finally I said, “As long as we go to a bar afterward, I was especially impressed when I found out that he’d been a student at IIT My whole life ITd been fascinated by people whod gone from nothing to in London, one of my friends asked me to go with him to hear a monk give a campus, but I had zero interest in a monk. I preferred to hear speakers who'd I’m in.” “Falling in love” is an expression used almost exclusively to describe Bombay, which is the MIT of India and, like MIT; nearly impossible to get into. something—rags-to-riches stories. Now, for the first time, I was in the presence talk. actually accomplished things in life. romantic relationships. But that night, as I listened to the monk talk about his He’d traded that opportunity to become a monk, walking away from everything of someone who'd deliberately done the opposite. He’d given up the life the

experience, I fell in love. The figure on stage was a thirty-something Indian man. that my friends and I were chasing. Either he was crazy or he was onto His head was shaved and he wore a saffron robe. He was intelligent, eloquent, something. and charismatic. He spoke about the principle of “selfless sacrifice.” When he said that we should plant trees under whose shade we did not plan to sit, I felt an unfamiliar thrill run through my body.

world had told me we should a// want. But instead of being an embittered Afterward, I pushed my way through the crowds to tell him how amazing he The monk told me that he was traveling and speaking in the UK all that failure, he appeared joyous, confident, and at peace. In fact, he seemed happier was, and how much he’d inspired me. “How can I spend more time with you?” I week, and I was welcome to come to the rest of his events. And so I did. than anyone I'd ever met. At the age of eighteen, I had encountered a lot of heard myself asking. I felt the urge to be around people who had the values I people who were rich. I'd listened to a lot of people who were famous, strong, wanted, not the things I wanted. good-looking, or all three. But I don’t think ITd met anyone who was truly

## happy.

My first impression of the monk, whose name was Gauranga Das, was that he As a team of scientists, some of them seasoned meditators themselves, was doing something right, and later I would discover that science backs that up. watched from a control room, the monk began the meditation protocol the In 2002, a Tibetan monk named Yongey Mingyur Rinpoche traveled from an researchers had designed—alternating between one minute of meditating on area just outside Kathmandu, Nepal, to the University of Wisconsin—Madison compassion and a thirty-second rest period. He quickly cycled through this so that researchers could watch his brain activity while he meditated. The pattern four times in a row, cued by a translator. The researchers watched in awe; scientists covered the monk’s head with a shower cap-—like device (an EEG) that at almost the exact moment the monk began his meditation, the EEG registered had more than 250 tiny wires sticking out of it, each with a sensor that a lab tech a sudden and massive spike in activity. The scientists assumed that with such a attached to his scalp. At the time of the study, the monk had accumulated sixty- large, quick bump, the monk must have changed positions or otherwise moved, two thousand hours of lifetime meditation practice. yet to the observing eye, he remained perfectly still.

What was remarkable was not just the consistency of the monks brain Researchers who scanned Buddhist monk Matthieu Ricard’s brain activity—turning “off” and “on” repeatedly from activity to rest period—but subsequently labeled him “the World’s Happiest Man” after they found the also the fact that he needed no “warm-up” period. If you’re a meditator, or have highest level of gamma waves—those associated with attention, memory, at least tried to calm your brain, you know that typically it takes some time to learning, and happiness—ever recorded by science. One monk who’s off the quiet the parade of distracting thoughts that marches through your mind. charts may seem like an anomaly, but Ricard isn’t alone. Twenty-one other Rinpoche seemed to need no such transition period. Indeed, he seemed to be monks who had their brains scanned during a variety of meditation practices able to come in and out of a powerful meditative state as easily as flipping a also showed gamma wave levels that spiked higher and lasted longer (even during switch. More than ten years after these initial studies, scans of the forty-one-year- sleep) than non-meditators. old monk’s brain showed fewer signs of aging than his peers’. The researchers said he had the brain of someone ten years younger.

Why should we think like monks? If you wanted to know how to dominate the Monks can withstand temptations, refrain from criticizing, deal with pain basketball court, you might turn to Michael Jordan; if you wanted to innovate, and anxiety, quiet the ego, and build lives that brim with purpose and meaning. you might investigate Elon Musk; you might study Beyoncé to learn how to Why shouldn’t we learn from the calmest, happiest, most purposeful people on perform. If you want to train your mind to find peace, calm, and purpose? earth? Maybe you’re thinking it’s easy for monks to be calm, serene, and relaxed. Monks are the experts. Brother David Steindl-Rast, a Benedictine monk who They’re hidden away in tranquil settings where they don’t have to deal with jobs cofounded gratefulness.org, writes, “A layperson who is consciously aiming to be continuously alive in the Now is a monk.”

and romantic partners and, well, rush hour traffic. Maybe you’re wondering, First of all, monks weren’t born monks. They’re people from all sorts of Like most monks today, I didn’t grow up in an ashram. I spent most of my But when I started secondary school, I took a left turn. Id been heavy as a “T'll change,” I promised. “If you let me stay, Pll change.” The school let me Finally, in college, I started to notice the value of hard work, sacrifice, By the time Gauranga Das came to speak at my school, I was primed to How could thinking like a monk help me here in the modern world? backgrounds who’ve chosen to transform themselves. Matthieu Ricard, “the childhood doing un-monk-like things. Until the age of fourteen, I was an child, and bullied for it, but now I lost that weight and began playing soccer and stay, and I cleaned up my act. discipline, persistence in pursuit of one’s goals. The problem was that at the explore new ideas, a new model of living, a path that veered from the one

World’s Happiest Man,” was a biologist in his former life; Andy Puddicombe, obedient kid. I grew up in north London with my parents and my younger rugby. I turned to subjects that traditional Indian parents don’t generally favor, time, I didn’t have any goals apart from getting a good job, getting married one everyone (including myself) assumed I would take. I wanted to grow as a person. cofounder of the meditation app Headspace, trained to be in the circus; I know sister. ’m from a middle-class Indian family. Like a lot of parents, mine were like art, design, and philosophy. All this would have been fine, but I also started day, maybe having a family—the usual. I suspected there was something deeper, monks who were in finance and in rock bands. They grow up in schools, towns, committed to my education and to giving me a shot at a good future. I stayed mixing with the wrong crowd. I became involved in a bunch of bad stuff. but I didn’t know what it was. and cities just like you. You don’t need to light candles in your home, walk out of trouble, did well in school, and tried my best to make everybody happy. Experimenting with drugs. Fighting. Drinking too much. It did not go well. In around barefoot, or post photos of yourself doing tree pose on a mountaintop. high school I was suspended three times. Finally, the school asked me to leave. Becoming a monk is a mindset that anyone can adopt.

I didn’t want to know humility or compassion and empathy only as abstract For the next four years, I juggled two worlds, going from bars and When I graduated from college, I traded my suits for robes and joined the concepts, I wanted to live them. I didn’t want discipline, character, and integrity steakhouses to meditation and sleeping on the floor. In London, I studied ashram, where we slept on the floor and lived out of gym lockers. I lived and to just be things I read about. I wanted to live them. management with an emphasis on behavioral science and interned at a large traveled across India, the UK, and Europe. I meditated for hours every day and

consulting firm and spent time with my friends and family. And at an ashram in studied ancient scriptures. I had the opportunity to serve with my fellow monks, Mumbai I read and studied ancient texts, spending most of my Christmas and helping with the ongoing work of transforming an ashram in a village outside summer holidays living with monks. My values gradually shifted. I found myself Mumbai into an eco-friendly spiritual retreat (the Govardhan Ecovillage) and wanting to be around monks. In fact, I wanted to immerse myself in the monk volunteering with a food program that distributes over a million meals a day mindset. More and more, the work I was doing in the corporate world seemed to (Annamrita). lack meaning. What was the point if it had no positive impact on anyone?

If I can learn to think like a monk, anyone can.

The Hindu monks I studied with use the Vedas as their foundational texts. (The Like Homer’s epic poems, the Vedas were first transmitted orally, then title is from the Sanskrit word veda, meaning knowledge. Sanskrit is an ancient eventually written down, but because of the fragility of the materials (palm language that’s the precursor of most of the languages spoken in South Asia today.) You could argue that philosophy began with this ancient collection of scriptures, which originated in the area that now covers parts of Pakistan and northwest India at least three thousand years ago; they form the basis of Hinduism.

